README.md, before:

# [WIP] tiny-C
![CI](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/Locietta/tiny-C/CI/main)
![](https://img.shields.io/github/license/Locietta/xanmod-kernel-WSL2)

❗This is still a WIP project.

This is a tiny C compiler built with Antlr4 and LLVM, as a simple exercise on compiler design.

## Dependencies

DevContainer is configured for build dependencies. With VSCode  Remote-Container, you can use it easily. Or you can pull the docker image from `locietta/loia-dev-base:antlr4`.

We basically base our work on ANTLR4 and LLVM13, while also use graphviz and fmt.

gcc >= 11 or clang >= 13 is needed, for we use a few C++20 features. Lower version of compilers might also work, but we didn't test them.

## Build

We use CMake to build.

```
cmake --build build --config Debug
cmake --build build --config Release
```

## Usage

```
$ ./tinycc -h
OVERVIEW: Simple compiler for C
USAGE: tinycc [options] <input file>

OPTIONS:

Color Options:

  --color             - Use colors in output (default=autodetect)

General options:

  -A                  - Alias for --emit-ast
  -C                  - Alias for --emit-cfg
  -O=<int>            - Choose optimization level
  --debug-sexpr       - Output S-expression of generated AST to stdout
  --emit-ast          - Emit tree graph for all ASTs
  --emit-cfg          - Emit Control Flow Graphs for all functions
  -o=<filename>       - Specify output filename
  --pic-dir=<dirname> - Specify output directory of pics, default to `output`

Generic Options:

  --help              - Display available options (--help-hidden for more)
  --help-list         - Display list of available options (--help-list-hidden for more)
  --version           - Display the version of this program
```

For example, `tinycc a.c -O=1 -a -C` will produce optimized code including `a.ll`(LLVM IR code) and `a.o`(x86 machine code), and will generate AST graphs and control flow graphs under `output` folder.

### Some Reference Links

* [Antlr4 CMake Documentation](https://github.com/antlr/antlr4/tree/master/runtime/Cpp/cmake)
* [Embedding LLVM in CMake Project](https://llvm.org/docs/CMake.html#embedding-llvm-in-your-project)
* [Kaleidoscope](https://llvm.org/docs/tutorial/MyFirstLanguageFrontend/index.html) & [Bolt based on LLVM](https://mukulrathi.com/create-your-own-programming-language/llvm-ir-cpp-api-tutorial/)
* [How to use the New Pass Manager (PM)](https://llvm.org/docs/NewPassManager.html)
* [LLVM IR Reference](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html)

Commit message:

linker: add option to specify the gcc version to link libs

README.md, after:

# [WIP] tiny-C

![CI](https://img.shields.io/github/workflow/status/Locietta/tiny-C/CI/main)
![](https://img.shields.io/github/license/Locietta/xanmod-kernel-WSL2)

❗This is still a WIP project.

This is a tiny C compiler built with Antlr4 and LLVM, as a simple exercise on compiler design.

## Dependencies

DevContainer is configured for build dependencies. With VSCode Remote-Container, you can use it easily. Or you can pull the docker image from `locietta/loia-dev-base:antlr4`.

We basically base our work on ANTLR4 and LLVM13, while also use graphviz and fmt.

gcc >= 11 or clang >= 13 is needed, for we use a few C++20 features. Lower version of compilers might also work, but we didn't test them.

## Build

We use CMake to build.

```
cmake --build build --config Debug
cmake --build build --config Release
```

## Usage

```
$ ./tinycc -h
OVERVIEW: Simple compiler for C
USAGE: tinycc [options] <input file>

OPTIONS:

Color Options:

  --color                     - Use colors in output (default=autodetect)

General options:

  -A                          - Alias for --emit-ast
  -C                          - Alias for --emit-cfg
  -O=<int>                    - Choose optimization level
  --debug-sexpr               - Output S-expression of generated AST to stdout
  --emit-ast                  - Emit tree graph for all ASTs
  --emit-cfg                  - Emit Control Flow Graphs for all functions
  --gcc-lib-version=<version> - Specify the version gcc, used for linker to link the gcc lib. Default to 12.1.0
  -o=<filename>               - Specify output filename
  --pic-dir=<dirname>         - Specify output directory of pics, default to `output`

Generic Options:

  --help              - Display available options (--help-hidden for more)
  --help-list         - Display list of available options (--help-list-hidden for more)
  --version           - Display the version of this program
```

For example, `tinycc a.c -O=1 -a -C` will produce optimized code including `a.ll`(LLVM IR code) and `a.o`(x86 machine code), and will generate AST graphs and control flow graphs under `output` folder.

### Some Reference Links

- [Antlr4 CMake Documentation](https://github.com/antlr/antlr4/tree/master/runtime/Cpp/cmake)
- [Embedding LLVM in CMake Project](https://llvm.org/docs/CMake.html#embedding-llvm-in-your-project)
- [Kaleidoscope](https://llvm.org/docs/tutorial/MyFirstLanguageFrontend/index.html) & [Bolt based on LLVM](https://mukulrathi.com/create-your-own-programming-language/llvm-ir-cpp-api-tutorial/)
- [How to use the New Pass Manager (PM)](https://llvm.org/docs/NewPassManager.html)
- [LLVM IR Reference](https://llvm.org/docs/LangRef.html)
